Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Lops. And
today I'm joined by Dr Alva Noe. He's professor
and Chair of Philosophy at the University of California
Berkeley. He is the author of many books. And
today we're talking about his latest one, the entanglement,
how art and philosophy make us what we are.
So, Doctor Noah, welcome to the show. It's a
pleasure to everyone.
Thank you very much for inviting me.
So the first question I would like to ask
you is um since you are, I guess we
could say mostly a philosopher of mind, what got
you interested also in art and what is art
for you and how do you approach it in
the book specifically?
Yeah. Thank you very much. That's, that's in a
way the uh it's both a personal question about
me, but in some ways, it really gets us
right to the very heart of the book. Um
There's different ways I can answer it. Um One
is that sort of biographically, my first book was
called action and Perception. And the central theme of
action and perception was the idea that that um
the best sort of, by a lot, the best
biological way to think about perceptual consciousness is as
something that the animal accomplishes or achieves and that
it does so against the background of its situation
and the environment for humans, that also means the
cultural environment. Um So this sort of idea which
is sometimes called an uh the the inactive approach
to perception, places great emphasis on um the animal's
embodiment and the animal's skills or the person's embodiment
and the person's skills um perception isn't something that
happens inside of us. It's something we do. And
to my um great surprise, I received a lot
of um responses to the book from people working
in the arts, especially people working in the performing
arts, dancers, uh choreographers, but not only dancers and
choreographers, also painters and sculptors and, and other kinds
of artists. Um And they all were in sort
of interested as, as a community they were interested
in, in seeing what my approach to perception offer
them, how it supported their understanding of their own
work. But I immediately became interested in these conversations
with the question. Well, what, what do they have
to teach me about the phenomenon that interests me,
what are they doing anyway? What is, what is
this work of, of, of artists? What is, is
it, are they just making decorations? Are they making
pretty things? Are they? I mean, what, what are,
what are they doing especially since they take themselves
very seriously. And uh uh and we take the
arts very seriously. So this got me interested in
the question, what is, what is art and what
is the source of its value? And my, my
first attempt to explore that was in my book,
Strange Tools, which was published at the very end
of 2015 Strange Tools, subtitle Art and Human Nature.
Um And in that book, I really asked the
question, what is our, what, why does it matter
to us and what does the fact that it
matters to us? Tell us about ourselves? Mhm. Um
The, the current book, um the Entanglement goes way
beyond uh Strange Tools and it's been kind of
a, a transformative experience for me writing it. Um
But um to come back to your, your question,
you can think about the question, what is art
kind of anthropologically? Mhm. Um Or if you like
philosophically and, and the contrast I have in mind
there is in one sense, we all know what
art is, we can just refer to it. There's,
there's painting and there's music and there's film and
there's dance and there's pottery and there's um you
know, installation art and I'm, I'm forgetting one, I'm
sure. But, but art is this specific set of
making activities that preoccupy human beings pretty much everywhere
and pretty much always. Um So there's a, there's
probably if you think of art in terms of
those collections of, of things that we do playing
the drums, playing the flute, writing novels, with all
of all of that is art. There's probably not
any straightforward way of, of uh defining what art
is. It's just simply, it's all of that. And
so that's what I mean by an anthropological approach.
You just kind of we all kind of know
roughly what we're talking about when we're talking about
the arts. Um Can you go deeper, can you
say something more, more um profound about what art
is, why it, why it matters to us? And
I think you can um I'll tell you my
bottom line, but in a way how you get
to the bottom line is the more interesting question.
I think that art is uh art, arts, the
arts are practices and their practices through which we
reorganize ourselves. And even I would go so far
as to say, liberate ourselves from the habits and
other systems of organization, cultural, biological, emotional linguistic that
in some sense, hold us captive. And I mean,
I could say one more thing about that. Um
You know, the thing is one of the beautiful
things about art and what makes art puzzling is
that on the face of it materially speaking, it
really looks no different from other forms of technological
manufacture and making, you know, um people make things
I make, you know, somebody manufactured this glass of
water. Um THE, the pen, the computer, the telephone
the systems that we're using right now, the clothes
that we're wearing all of this is made and
art is just more stuff that we make. So,
one of the interesting questions is how does the
making, the dedicated dedication to making in the sphere
of art differ from the dedication to making in
the sphere of manufacture or industry or technology? And
um answering that question is the key. Mhm
So you mentioned many different things there and we'll
certainly get through them in our conversation. But uh
the question I have now is then art is
much more than, at least in your perception, much
more than uh than just a cultural curiosity. As
many people would probably think of it.
Right. Right. I guess there, there would be a
view according to which, you know, there's the important,
the really important things in life, food and security
and shelter. And um and only once a society
gets to a certain stage of security and wealth,
do you have time for art? Art is this
kind of, it's an extra, it comes, it comes
after and you can do without it. No, the
view that I try to develop in this book,
the arguments I make is that there is nothing
which is recognizably a human form of life that
doesn't have art. And that's because art is um
in some ways, I want to say it's both
and a response to the human condition and a
precondition of the human condition. Um We, we make
art to, to cope with the challenges of our
own existence. But art then changes the character of
our own existence. Um And this, by the way,
a phrase that I use throughout the book is
II, I speak of the entanglement of life and
art and in a way this is the kind
of the core thought there art starts from life.
Mhm By that, I, I don't mean that art
is about life in a kind of semantic sense.
Some artist, I make a picture of you and
then it's about you and it's about something I
experienced in my living world. Um But I mean,
something more like we make art out of life
or life gives art its raw materials. But the
very act of bringing those raw materials into focus
in the way that art lets us do gives
us resources. This is I'm speaking very abstractly now
I can give examples later but gives us ex
example, gives us resources for living differently so that
we make art out of life. But then life
becomes something new in an art world and then
art becomes something new given that the change in
life and you get a kind of historical circular
pattern of making and remaking and making and remaking.
Um WHERE we face a kind of almost paradoxical
conclusion, which is that um we are somehow by
nature bound up with art. But by that very
fact alone, it's no longer quite appropriate to speak
of our nature at all because our nature is
changing. Um And there's even a sense in which
a AAA rigorous meaningful sense in which we are
ourselves artworks.
So could you give us perhaps some examples of
how that entanglement between life and art plays out?
Yeah. Um I'll give you two. I discuss a
number of different examples in the book, but I'll
give you, I'll give you two right now. Um
One is a kind of fairly straightforward one. Um
TICK tick dancing, it's tempting to think of dancing
as a sort of a natural human capacity. Um
OR at least it seems to be universal in
human societies and, and if you think about dancing,
it um it serves all sorts of psychological slash
anthropological functions. People dance at weddings or funerals or
they dance in clubs and when they dance at
clubs, it's partly social and it's about communication and
maybe about courtship or about, you know, romance or
it can dance. Dance can be many, many different
things, but it's always something it's dancing is always
bound up with needs. Dancing is also very interesting
because it's um it, when people dance, whether in
a club or at a party, they feel um
they get caught up in the dancing, the dancing
has a kind of bodily entrainment to it. You,
you, you, you don't, you don't dance in a
deliberate controlled way if you dance. Well, at all,
you let the dance just happen and you just
move, you let the the demands of the situation,
the partner of the music they govern you. So
dance is a very interesting, a cognitively, extremely interesting
thing that people do. Um But now what about
the art of dancing? What about choreography, the kind
of thing that happens on the stage, right? Well,
choreography is, I would say it's dancing severed from
the way in which it's ordinarily embedded in our
lives. Um The dancers on the stage are not
wooing, they're not courting, they're not um they're not.
Well, what they're doing is an interesting question. But
one of the, one of the things that I
would say about what they're doing is that they're
putting, they're displaying dancing itself. There's this thing we
do, it's called dancing. And then the, the art,
the art dancers are putting that thing. We do
itself on the stage and saying this is dancing
and so in effect, they're putting us on the
stage as people who are habitually culturally organized by
dancing. Um So I, I see a difference between
dance. Sometimes I say dance with a capital D
and dancing. Mhm Dancing is embedded in our culture
and our psychology and our economy of living dance
is this kind of representation of this thing that
we do when we're dancing. But the image that
dancing gives us, excuse me, the image that choreography
gives us that dance with the capital D gives
us of what we do when we're dancing then
becomes a template or a model or even a
kind of score for how to dance. So that
how we spontaneously dance you or I when we're
at a party or celebration or in a nightclub
ends up being influenced by the art of dance.
But then the art of dance is concerned with
the way in which dancing organizes us and our
lives. So the art of dance will then be
influenced by the changes in the way we dance.
And so you get a kind of a loop
of the representation of dancing, altering dancing and dancing,
giving rise to new pictures or models or templates
or scores of what dancing can be. No, you
might think. Yes. Well, there's the kind of natural
phenomenon of dancing at the core and then there's
this kind of cultural play that has happened on
top of it. But those are now in tango,
they cannot really any longer be disentangled except in
thought. Now what it is to be a human
being who dances is to be a human being
whose sense of what it is they're doing has
been made available to them through art over long
periods of time. So dance and dancing, art and
life have become inextricably entangled. And this is something
we live each of us individually. In the first
person, you know, you watch, I talk in the
book. But I imagine a little girl dancing by
herself in a room to music. What she's doing
is is informed by a whole set of ideas
and images about what she's doing. This is called
dancing. Dancing looks like this. This is not dancing.
That that's something else. This is how one dances,
this is how dancing looks to other people. So
that there's an interesting way that the girl might
just think, oh, put on the music and dance.
No thought at all. But in an interesting way,
I think she embodies or incorporates a whole art
history which, which is not ever finished. So that's
one example. Um Now that's another another example um
is um it, it's, it's actually slightly more complicated.
Um But I'll see if I can get a
simple version of it and we can get into
complications if we need to. But um if I
show you a photograph of my son, this is
my kid. It's on my Facebook page. It's in
my fa family photo album here. This is my
son. My, my photograph is functioning, I believe as
a tool or instrument for display. It's serving a
playing a role in the communication. I'm letting you
see something, I'm showing you something I'm framing um
a kind of extension. This is the Edinburgh Castle,
you know, or this is what the uh lounge
looks like at the Lisbon airport. We use pictures
to show and we use pictures to show for
all sorts of reasons. I can go online and
buy a coat, looking at the pictures of the
coat and I can zoom in and zoom out
or choose this color or that color. Look at
this model. Is that model or every week I
get in the mail from my supermarket. The, the,
the latest deals on chicken and broccoli and there's
pictures, there's pictures of chicken, there's pictures of broccoli
pictures function in a kind of social economy of
communication. Now, I think actually there's a very interesting
set of questions there about how depiction works, how
pictures work and I have ideas about that. But,
but what I'm interested now is the fact that
when I make, when I make an art picture,
I'm no longer just playing the game of showing
you something because the interesting thing about an art
picture and this is analogous to the dancing situation.
The interesting thing about an art picture is there
is no one right way to see it. There
is no one thing it is showing. It doesn't
have a caption that exhausts what it is of
it. It, it resists um being reduced to a
function. It has no, there is no user manual
that tells you what it is or how to
use it or how to make sense of it.
The what the picture does the eye picture is,
it takes itself as a picture and extracts it
from the cultural communicative background against which pictures normally
have a depict function. And thus it throws you
the person looking at this work of art back
on yourself to interrogate yourself about the role that
ordinary non art pictures have in your life. Um
How pictures shape what we think it is to
look at something or how pictures shape what it
is we think to show something or how pictures
affect our, our feelings about other people or how
we use pictures in different ways than we use
in person viewing. So all of a sudden this
work of art has the capacity to what seen
and being seen and looking and showing and the
role these play the meaning these have in our
lives themselves on display. Just as the choreographer puts
dancing on display, the the picture puts all the
different things that pictures can mean for us or
the things that are depicted can mean for us.
Like how I feel about the one depicted, my
daughter or God, how, how do we process what
we see? And the work of art then gives
us an opportunity. Um The picture gives us an
opportunity if you like to uncover the place of
pictures in our lives. Um And that then in
turn, I believe changes. So what we take for
granted about pictures in our lives and lets us
have different and new attitudes, not just to pictures,
but also to seeing or to showing or to
communicating with pictures and thus you get an entanglement
of the art of pictures in our lives with
pictures. And when you, when you remind yourself that
we've been making and using pictures to show since
prehistoric times, the claim I would make is that
our very conceptions, I, I don't say concept are
very conceptions of what seeing is and visual life
is, have been made and remade through picture making
practices and in particular art making practices with pictures
over and over and over and over again. It's
another example. So then, and this starts to get
very exciting for a philosopher because now you come
along and you're a cognitive scientist and you want
to study vision and you think that there is
this fixed stable thing called seeing? Mhm But do
we actually know what seeing is independently of that
generative work of re understanding what we're doing when
we see that is shaped in part by pictorial?
And so give, given what you're what you just
said there. Uh HOW does that all tie to
questions surrounding human nature? First of all, I guess
what is human nature? Because many times when we
use that term, people are referring to something like
um some sort of innate psychology that we are
born with something that is unchangeable, something that is
sometimes probably the result of our evolutionary history. But
in this particular case, by adding art and then
later on, we'll also get into philosophy, what kind
of picture. Do we get about how we should
understand human
nature? This is the hardest question. Um BECAUSE it's
not, it's not that I really want to deny
human nature. It's that I want us to recognize
the always already already problematic nature of human nature.
And in particular, I want to say that human
nature is an aesthetic problem. And let me see
if I can explain that. OK. Um I mean,
I mean, actually, first of all, as a preliminary
for your, for your audience, I should say, and
this is this, I think is not an original
idea to me. Um And is not um even
all that controversial anymore. Um I think we all
recognize how human life is scaffolded by culture and
technology. Um We, we can do things you and
I not because we're so smart, but because we
are members of a community that gives us the
instruments to do it. So we don't catch our
own food, we don't make our own clothing, we
don't um solve our own survival problems. We, we
rest on um a, an existing network of knowledge
and technology that lets us be the way we
live. And this, you know, this goes down to
very profound levels. Um We use writing and language
to think with. So our very cognitive powers are,
are extended uh as the image goes through um
through technology. Um So, in some sense, we already
know that human nature is the stuff of change
and evolution because all of this is evolving and
changing. Um In fact, if you, if you think
of leading sort of accounts of human evolutionary origins,
what seems clear is that most of the primary
mutations responsible for modern Homo SAPIEN were done a
few 100,000 years ago at least. Um So all
the stuff that we've made since then, language, dress,
culture, communication, all of that can't be explained just
with reference to the mutations, that stuff that has
been done through collectives of, of this particular ape
that we are over, over time. So, um so
already we're, we're at a step of removal from
a certain kind of naive biological reductionism on any
I think persuasive conception of the human mind and
the human life. Um What I believe is further
the case is that human beings resist the ways
they find themselves organized by habit, organized by technology,
the technology we speak of technology. But what is
a technology? A tool is just the physical component
of a suite of ability, skills, practices, techniques, habits.
So if I can write with a pen, if
I can type on a keyboard, I have Inc
Corp, I have been shaped, I've been molded, I
have been controlled by the keyboard so you can
see it. Um Or the pen, the pen is
designed for my hand and my hand learns to
be a different kind of thing with the pen.
I think that art and philosophy will come to
philosophy, you said mhm are ways that we put
ourselves on display for ourselves and, and let us
make changes, let us resist forms of habitual organization.
So, and that's, that's the work of art, that's
the work of philosophy and that's, that's resistance to
technology, that's resistance to culture in a way. It's,
it's paradox because we think of art as culture.
But in a way I'm saying art is anti
culture, art says no to what culture defines us
as culture says, this is how you walk. This
is how you talk. This is how you look,
this is how you feel. And art says no,
art gives us different ways of walking, talking, looking,
thinking, feeling um which then in turn changes that
so does this mean there's no such thing as
the science of human life? No, but it means
that there's a place inside life for the aesthetic.
And I think it has historically been extremely difficult
and maybe even it's finally impossible. I'm not sure
but extremely difficult for science for what we call
experimental or empirical science to comprehend the aesthetic and
it's in a limit place in our lives. Now,
let, let me say why? Why I say that?
Um I actually already gave this example, take the
question of perceptual consciousness. So scientists say, OK, consciousness,
it happens in the brain, we can explore its
neural correlates, we can use brain imaging and different
theories of the brain and different theories of cognitive
psychology to model what goes on in the brain
when you see, right? But that takes for granted
that we know what seeing is. And I submit
that there are no final settled unproblematic ways of
answering the question. What do you see? Now, scientists
for, for experimental purposes may choose to operationalize the
notion of seeing this way or that way and
that's fine. But you and I are the subjects
of seeing, always realize that there's more that we're
not saying is that we're leaving something out. So
right now, I I see the screen but I
also see the background. Now, do I see all
the detail in the background or do I see
some of the detail in the background? Do I
only see what I care about? But also my
vis my experience right now, it's guided by interest
concern what we're doing. It's not separate from our
communication. It's also not not separate from emotions that
I have or curiosities that I have or uh
you know, a desire to promote my book or
a desire to explain these ideas or desire to
come across in a good way. I mean, this
is very, very complicated what set of relationships I
have to my circumstances that I would describe by
saying, you know, I see your image on the
screen, but I see your image on the screen
as a kind of uh cliche or minimal uh
under under description of what I see. And my
claim is that our relationship to our own experience
is a little bit like our relation to a
work of art. There's no one exhaustive way to
characterize its meaning. And moreover, the very activity of
thinking about our experience, like thinking about the work
of art changes how we experience the work of
art and changes how we experience ourselves. And I
think that's true for all of the fundamental human
categories. Uh It's true for emotion, it's true for
perception, it's true for consciousness, it's true for feeling.
It's true for affect. I even think it's true
for, for rationality. It's true for, for for reason
itself, which means that um science rests on this
molten unstable, constantly changing, legitimately contestable domain of the
human. And uh that's, that's an important limitation. It
means I think that a certain kind of positive
knowledge such as we have in physics or chemistry
is not going to be available to us in
psychology or cognitive science.
So, uh I mean, I guess that you've already
addressed there at least a little bit the question
of uh in your view, why probably disciplines like
psychology, cognitive science and other sciences of the mind
are not fully equipped to for uh to give
us a complete understanding of our human experience, human
psychology and so on. But then uh could we
get that full picture by adding this understanding of
art and philosophy that you present in the book.
And if so, and if so what kind of
understanding would this be, if not a strictly scientific
one?
Right. It's interesting. We, you know, we, we assume
it's a very funny and bizarre idea that one
would, uh, that one would think that all knowledge
and all experience could be packed into the shape
of science. Science is itself a particular mode of
human life and inquiry. And when you're, you know,
when you're um ta talking to your kid at
dinner, your relation to your child is not the
relation, you have to an empirical phenomenon. Uh You're
in a relationship with your child and your concerns
as a parent. I'm just saying that as an
example, I don't know whether you have Children, but
um your concerns as a parent are as much
as you care about what's best for your child
and what science will tell you what's best for
your child. Your concerns as a parent are not
epistemological in that sense. Um And so much of
human life has nothing to do with um with
uh with what we do when we're in the
laboratory. Um And one of the curious things that
philosophy has done is it's opened up this thought
that somehow the truest mode of human relationship with
the world around us is something like that of
the scientists relation to the scientific object. Maybe, maybe
this goes back to, to Descartes. I it may
go back farther. But um you know, in the
book, I talk about the contrast between between Descartes
and Vica um uh for Des Cartes, the scientific
method, the geometrical method is, is the basis is
the fundamental mode of knowing Vico, who I'm, I'm
not an expert on and I rely heavily on
secondary sources in my understanding of Vico. But Vico
is um especially I might say a lovely book
about him by Jurgen Trabant. Um uh Vico is
a uh is a person who thinks of poetry
and wit and style and irony as the basic
modality of human knowing. Um And there's a kind
of comprehension, a kind of deep, intellectually rigorous comprehension
that has to do with language, words, with the
play of the intellect, not the deduction, but the
flirtation. It's a, it's, it's real. I don't know
if he would have said that actually, but it's,
but not the deduction, but the um the ironic
play of, of storytelling. Um And it's, it's interesting
because obviously we need both, we need both, both,
both complement each other. But um so the idea
that there's no place for the kind of special
work we do when we do science is, is
a form of irrational is, but the idea that
all human knowledge should take that form is I
think an equally benighted form of misunderstanding. And it's
one which interestingly, uh it strikes me that it's
one that we're confronting in a very interesting way
in the intellectual space surrounding artificial intelligence, um which
is its whole separate topic. Uh We can put
to one side. But um but so one last
thing then, then I'll shut up because II, I
do give two long answers. I apologize. But the,
I think another name for that space or method
of inquiry, which is necessary and complementary to, to
natural science is philosophy and dark. So, um it's,
I think that there's a way in which um
what philosophy and art aim at doing is not
um taking questions for granted and looking for the
solutions, but they explore the questions we've neglected or
they um you know, a quote that I give
in the book comes from, from the American writer
James Baldwin is that art uncovers the questions that
have been hidden by the answers. So, and I
think something like that is true of philosophy as
well. It's, it's not the answers, it's, it's, it's
um what the answers hide from view. Um And
one of the interesting things about a work of
art and this is this is a really important
piece of phenomenological data. One of the really interesting
things about a work of art is it's there
for you on display. It's nothing is hidden as
Liechtenstein might have said it's just, it hangs there,
it sits there and yet you cannot really see
it, it defies straightforward, seeing it, it makes you
do something in order to see it. So for
me and this is, I haven't had a chance
to say this yet in our conversation, but it's,
it's, it's crucial. I think um I think you
appreciate this based on your reading of the book.
But I offer a new definition of the aesthetic
in this book or not a new definition. I,
I offer a way of thinking about the aesthetic,
which I think is somewhat novel. And for me,
the aesthetic denotes the work we do of trying
to see what we cannot see or of trying
to bring into focus, what is open to view,
but somehow cut off from it. Aesthetics names the
movement from not perceiving, to perceiving or not seeing,
to seeing or perceiving or seeing to seeing or
perceiving differently. And uh that's the work that, that
Plato did and that's the work that Kunz did
and that's the work that Hagel did. And that's
the work that Wittgenstein did and that's the work
that Frager did and that's the work that, that
all great philosophers really aim at not new data,
not new facts and but new ways of seeing
what was there all along or which is just
to say works about or philosophical work invites you
to make changes to yourself so that you can
come into a relationship with what is there all
about. And my view is that you can't, you
can't eliminate that. I mean, you li you can
close down every art department and every philosophy department
and only fund engineering and physics departments, but you
can't get rid of art and philosophy because art
and philosophy are prior to physics, um physics is
seeking the explanation, art and philosophy are about perception.
They're about a more immediate kind of, of knowledge.
Um Yeah.
So let me ask you one question about philosophy
just to clarify this point because it's actually something
that uh I mean, I'm not sure uh what
is your precise idea here. But when you use
the word philosophy, when you talk about philosophy here
in our conversation, and also in your book, are
you referring to what uh philosophers, academic philosophers or
any other sort of professional philosophers uh do? Or
is it a broader activity that people who are
not professionally, philosophers can also do and can also
experience through, I don't know, thought processes, processes of
reflection about their own condition about what kinds of
questions might raise uh about the existence or anything
else uh around
them. Yeah. Beautiful, beautiful question. Exactly goes right to
the very heart of the issue. Um It reminds
me of where our conversation began with my distinguishing
uh anthropological sense of what art is from a
more philosophical sense. And I think exactly the same
point can be made about philosophy, you can think
of, you can think of philosophy as whatever it
is that is taught in philosophy department. So whatever
it is that is published by books that are
categorized as philosophy books. Um And in that sense,
and that does kind of give you a nice
way of picking out what it is. And if
you're, if you're a person out there in the
world who's never had the privilege of studying philosophy,
that's a useful way of thinking about what philosophy
is. This is your opportunity to, you go to
a university and you meet people who are dedicated
to this work. Um And that's a very valuable
thing, but I would say two things first that
um there's an additional further sense in which philosophy
is a certain style of intellectual work. And that
although academic philosophers do that work, uh that work
is not confined to the work of professional philosophers.
And I would say that philosophy um uh philosophical
problems presents itself potentially at least in every walk
of life and in every domain. So to make
AAA I think a fairly uncontroversial point, um there
is philosophy done by people who are empirical sciences.
No many people believe. And I would agree that
some of Einstein's most important breakthroughs were philosophical in
the sense that he wasn't discovering a piece of
information about simultaneity. He was really asking us to
get to the heart of what we think we
mean when we speak of two events as being
simultaneous. He was doing a kind of conceptual analysis
which for me and I have a kind of
platonic view of this is a kind of reminding
ourselves of how our concepts work and of, of
what our, how our concepts relate to each other.
So similarly, I think a lot of the work
that counts as cognitive science, whether you think of,
of uh work by linguists like Noam Chomsky or
work by vision scientists like David Maher or James
Gibson uh has aspects that I just straight philosophy.
You see this in mathematics. I think a lot
of a lot of mathematics or like take Fraga's
anxieties about what numbers were, those were philosophical anxieties
about the the ontology of number. So I say
all this just because philosophical problems aren't the private
property of card carrying academic professors of philosophy. You
can be a mathematician or a neuroscientist or a
linguist or a computer scientist and engage with philosophy.
So, moreover, I think we engage in philosophy all
the time when we uh outside of intellectual life
altogether, when we uh when we interrogate our lives
and our values and our choices um ethics is
not confined to the academy. Ethical problems are, are
real problems and they're philosophical problems. So what's the
definition of a philosophical problem then for me, I
mean, I, I don't have a, a perfect answer,
but it's gonna be something like this. Philosophical questions
are questions that are substantial and significant, but for
which there are no decision procedures or there are
no settled ways of answering them. So, you know,
I think a classical example is an ethical kind
of where people have different ethical views. There's a
real disagreement and it matters, but there isn't a
method for deciding it's, and that's what I would
say is so there's, there is, I mean, there
is a method for, for, for engaging intellectual exchange
and argument, but there's no method for deciding um
in the way that there is inside well-developed empirical
theory. Um Now what I, the way I just
define philosophical problem is precisely the way um can't
defined an aesthetic problem. The thing about aesthetics is
um different people can have different aesthetic responses and
there's no way of deciding in advance as it
were, who's right and who's wrong. And yet, according
to Kant, the disagreement is inters subjectively significant, actual
disagreement. It's not like I like vanilla, you like
chocolate. It's like no chocolate is better than vanilla.
And it's, we can, we, we can argue about
that. Um um uh And people do argue about
it and they do change their minds over time,
not because there's a Qed. So I think it
was actually Gilbert Ryle who said no philosophical argument
ends with a Qed. Thus, it prove um I
agree with that. Now, let me just let me
say something else. A very interesting question. What the
way I've just characterized philosophy is how that stands
in relation to the actual practice of professional philosophers
um at universities. Um Is this a revisionist analysis
or am I saying that there's what, what, how
does, how does, how does that, that go? And
um I guess I would say something like this,
the final value of the work done by philosophers
at universities like my own is the way it
enables the kind of change and transformation that I'm
talking about. Whether or not that's the conscious aim
or objective of the philosophers in question and whether
or not they have that particular self understanding. So,
you know, these days, I think especially in the
analytic philosophical world, there's a huge pressure to model
philosophy on the model of the sciences. So to
give, to give an example, it is rarely discussed.
But I think it's very interesting. Yes, in science,
you write abstracts of articles and people can search
abstracts and that's very useful because if I wanna
start working on a certain protein, I wanna search
and find out who else has worked on that
protein and be sure I've read everything that's ever
been written about it. And so now we abstract
philosophy papers too. If you try to publish philosophical
article, you need to submit an abstract. But a
philosophy paper cannot be summed up as a simple
finding or abstracted claim because there are none in
philosophy that is in philosophy. The the very meaning
of the claim is always what the paper is
about. Philosophy literally doesn't have a bottom line. It's
it's always an interrogation. The meaning of the bottom
line depends on all the conversation and reasoning that
gets you there, which is why we can read
Kant without agreeing with Kant. We don't say, oh,
he was mistaken. Therefore, we don't read him or
Plato is mistaken. Therefore, we don't read him or,
you know, Bertrand Russell was mistaken. Therefore, we don't
read him. And there's a way in which the
category of mistake is not even relevant. What we're
interested in is whether the work they're doing helps
us with the problems we have. And that depends
on the work we do with the text. And
there is nothing to do with the bottom line.
I mean, it doesn't to do with the bottom
line, but it has to do with how we
reach the bottom line, you know, are mathematical propositions
synthetic a priori. Well, what the really interesting question
is not whether co was right or wrong? But
what does that mean? What does it mean to
say that the synthetic opera? Why would one say
that? What is one trying to, what is the
insight one is trying to capture, capture when you
say that? And then you can go further, you
say, well, it means we don't, we don't use
ordinary empirical methods for verifying mathematical statements. Well, that's
true. Um So why aren't they, why aren't they
just here? Well, and yet they seem to be
substantial, not merely logical, they seem to be telling
us about something they seem to have content. Oh
OK. So they're synthetic. And so then you tell
Mr, but then there's, you can get into the
discussions and maybe that is, or it isn't a
useful way of summing it up. Most people these
days I think, don't argue for the view that
mathematics is synthetic or p why not. Um Anyway,
so, so one of the ideas I play with
in the book, which is kind of a uh
a whimsical idea. But I think there's, there's really
some truth to it is I think of a
philosophical text is like a musical score. And when
I teach my students a philosophical text, I'm teaching
them not to know what the author believed, but
I'm teaching them to play the score, to play
along, to play with, to make, to make philosophy,
with this, this, this, these resources and you know,
finally the, the the students are gonna tell me
whether it's meaningful to them and they either will
or will not keep playing philosophers grow out of
fashion. You know, when I was a student starting
my graduate studies, you couldn't have a philosophical, philosophical
conversation about anything without talking about Donald Davidson. Mm
Or, or, or coin, I don't often hear people
refer to Quan and Davidson these days, not because
their work is any less important as it once
was, but people are less interested in playing it.
They wanna play other music now they wanna play
other styles of, of thinking. Now, I might, I
might not be correct about that, but that's a,
I'm giving that as an example. Um Kant has
stayed in fashion ever since he, ever since he
appeared Hager Nietzsche. These guys, they're, they're like, always
popular. Why? Because they're right. And what we talk
about the difference between analytic and continental philosophy, that's
the most to anybody who's outside of philosophy, that's
the stupidest thing that there could possibly be like
or for that matter, Western philosophy versus world philosophy.
Why, why should, why should we only care about
philosophy in one language or in one tradition? That's
silly. Um On the other hand, if you think
of it, is it like music? Well, people live
inside their musical cultures, they live inside their artistic
cultures. I can't, I don't know how to speak
Chinese and I don't know how to play Chinese
philosophy. I mean, that's in, that's I don't mean
to be making an argument for uh or like
ignorance. But on the other hand, people specialize people
live inside the, the places where they find themselves.
Um And in doing so, they also expand. So
European philosophy is, is not confined to Europe. So
let me ask you one question, I think that
you've already been touching on this throughout our conversation.
But when it comes to science, specifically taking into
account the sort of a framework that you present
in the book. And since science itself is also,
of course, a human endeavor then um how does
it relate to philosophy, to art? And I, is
there space for uh art, for example, in the
very practice of science or not?
Yeah. Um So I'm thinking about it because it's
um I, I really don't wanna say no to
science, I wanna say yes to art and yes
to philosophy. And I think that um I mean,
I think that there, I mean, in the book,
the way I explore this is I want to
differentiate art um from life or arts, from technology.
And I wanted different which means like I differentiate
art from design. Um And I differentiate philosophy from
science, but these are entangled, right? Um There is,
there is no science without philosophy and there is
no philosophy without science. Um Not just because some
philosophers are sometimes interested in empirical questions or some
scientists are sometimes interested in philosophical questions, but because
science and philosophy are different neighborhoods or sort of
different ends of a spectrum to change the metaphor.
And they, they have there's also neighborhoods where they're
very near to each other. So some philosophical work
just is not in interestingly or meaningfully different from
empirical scientific work and vice versa. Um So notice
I'm not saying, oh yeah, scientists should study art
because it'll be a useful method for their scientific
work that may or may not sometimes be true.
Um I mean, a very interesting domain kind of
problem that comes up in science is uh is
visualization. Um WHETHER a scientist is trying to visualize
a black hole with a picture or visualize or
in some sense, represent the structure of a protein
molecule or whether they want to um represent how
the brain is built. I mean, an interesting example
is uh Gogi and Kahar one, the Nobel Prize
essentially for making good pictures of cells. They just
took pictures of cells, they figured out how to
do it, but they didn't just photograph the cell.
They Dr Ramon Khal drew the sir and his
drawings were theoretically informed explanations of how the cells
worked. So he's a, he really understood the dendritic
and the the the the axonic structure and the
um the cell body versus these, these, these fingerings
that that come out. Um So in a way,
all he did was help you see something that
was there, which is very close to my definition
of what an artistic project is. And he certainly,
apparently from what I understand about uh Ramon Kaha,
uh Santiago Monica's life as if he, he wanted
to be an artist. And his father said, no,
his father said you have to stay in the
family business, which is medicine. So he found a
way to be an artist in medicine and these
drawings of his, I'm sure you've seen them. Now
there's now some beautiful books available, the new production,
um these are puzzling drawing. Now, I mean, they're
interesting drawings. Now, for me, I said at the
outset that the difference between an art drawing and
a and a and a mere pictorial drawing is
that a mere pictorial drawing has a function, it's
of something and you read the caption and that
tells you what it's of and this is a
representation of that. Um So if you stick strictly
to that definition, then, then uh Ramonica has work
is not artwork, it's illustration. OK. But is it
only that, is it ever, only one thing are
things ever? Only one thing? This is a really
interesting point because um this is a feature of
the entanglement. So take, take the great paintings of
renaissance churches in a, in a sense, they have
a caption. These are illustrations of stories from the
Bible for illiterate people. These are precisely didactic, functional
tools for indoctrination. But they're not only that they're
never, they're never only that. I mean, sometimes they
are only that and then they're not very artistically
interesting. But the reason why we why even non-christian
people, non-religious people visit those churches today is because
they're not only that. Mhm And that might be
true of Kahal Ramon Kala as well, which is
interesting. Um So I don't want to be dogmatic
and this is why I use this metaphor of
the entanglement because it, it allows you to see
how two things can become one thing even though
there are two things.
So uh, I have one last topic that I
would like to explore with you here today. I'm
not sure if this will be necessarily my last
question or not. But let's see. So, e even
before we started recording, we were talking a little
bit and one of the subjects that we touched
on that we, I thought would be very interesting
to bring back here to the interview was that,
um, across the world at the moment, at least,
and you were talking about there in the US?
And I said that here in Portugal is more
or less the same. People are feeling this sense
of uneasiness. We think that or we look at
things as very fragile. Uh I mean, the economic
situation, the political context, new wars breaking out climate
change and so on, everything seems very unstable. And
the reason why I'm bringing this to the conversation
is that, uh I mean, is there any way
by which we can understand uh our current state
and the way we react, reacting to things, our
sense of uneasiness and so on through the kind
of framework that you bring to your
book? Yeah, I'm, I'm glad you bring this up.
It's something I've been thinking a lot about. One
of, one of my favorite texts in this vicinity
is Hussars, this the um the crisis of the
European Sciences. Um I don't know if this is
a book that, you know, um it was published
in the, it was written in the late 19
thirties. After Hal was already in exile, he was
forced into exile, lost his professorship because he was
Jewish. And in under national socialism, he couldn't, he
couldn't teach. Um HE was in Prague, I think
when he wrote, when he wrote this book and
you know, the, the Second World War was on
the horizon, Confronting Germany Europe and the World. And
in that book, whose role makes by my reading
at least a wild clam, he says that the
problem that the world is facing is a philosophical
problem. You know, here's Germany getting ready to invade
all of Europe. He himself has been deprived of
his position. Anti-semitism is run amok and the problem
is philosophical and specifically, he thought it was a
problem with European science, a philosophical problem about science.
Mm um And then further what the problem was
for hu was not that science was too insufficient
or too weak, but that it was too strong,
it was too powerful, it was too effective. Science
was taken over everything and every space seemed to
be a scientific space. Um But Huso said that
that the kinds of standards of precision positivity that
science offers us don't apply to ourselves. Just as
I've been arguing, they don't apply to consciousness subjectivity,
they don't apply to reason itself. Now, how you
get from there to the Second World War is
that's a kind of a what I'm not sure
this, that's the direction I want to go in.
But our cultural moment strikes me as very, very
similar to his we science is immensely prestigious in
our world today. And yet the fundamental picture of
human life that science offers, it is very limited.
I mean, there are different, there are different offerings.
There's the evolutionary perspective, according to which we're genes,
there's the sort of the neuroscientific perspective according to
which we're just brain cells. There's the kind of
computational perspective according to which we're just algorithms. Um
But I think that there's something dissatisfying and unbelievable
that the embodied socially situated historical beings that we
are could be just brain cells or just genes
or just algorithms. And um and that then in
turn, I think maybe breeds anti scientific suspicion because
there's a kind of way in which science is
making claims that are not believable. So, and maybe
that feeds crisis, I'm not sure, certainly one of
the different crises we face when you think about
the climate crisis is how many people deny the
climate crisis. Um OR um you know, we saw,
we saw during the pandemic how many people denied
the uh the necessity and efficacy of vaccine, um
religious religious fundamentalists around the world, you know, deny
evolution, they deny anything. And uh and in one
sense, don't get me wrong. I'm I, I speak
as a, as a lover of science. Um IN
one sense, I think they are rightly castigated as
ignorant and idiotic. These people who, who attack science
in that way, but not entirely because science as
hr feared, knows no bounds and seems to be
the only game in town. But the, but these
important questions that matter to us about values, subjectivity,
consciousness, rationality, these questions are not scientist questions, but
how do we answer them? Well, they're philosophies questions.
They're arts questions. So again, I, I would be
embarrassed to argue that art and philosophy can save
us. You know, that, that, that, that, that um
that we can, you know that art and philosophy
are gonna cure the climate crisis. No, obviously not,
you need science for that, but science alone can't
do it either. Art and philosophy are, are part
of a solution. And um so in a, in
one way, I'm very, you can think of my
book. It has many I'm doing, I'm doing different
things in the book. But one of the things
I'm doing is I'm making an argument against uh
the sort of the stem worldview, science, technology, engineering,
mathematics as if that's, that's, that's the important thing
and I appreciate that um not everybody can be
a philosopher, not everybody can be an artist, just
as not everybody can be a science or an
engineer or a scientist or an engineer. But um
it does seem to me that um if we
neglect science and our, our situation is very helpless,
excuse me for neglect philosophy and art, the situation
is very helpless. So,
yeah, so perhaps that would be a good note
to end on. Uh THE book is again the
entanglement, sorry,
a very sad and depressing note, I suppose. But
in a way, I mean, it to be a
positive, a positive note and I'm singing the praises
of art and philosophy.
Yes. So the book is again the entanglement how
art and philosophy make us what we are. I'm
leaving a link with in the description box of
the interview and doctor. No. Uh Just before we
go apart from the book, would you like to
tell people where they can find you when your
work on the internet?
Oh, yeah, thank you. I had a uh um
I teach at the University of California in Berkeley
and um you can, you can Google me and
find my website. Uh There, I actually have a
private website as well. Albano.com. So it's my www
albano.com. Um I'm on uh I'm on what used
to be called Twitter at Albano. Um And in
addition to my post at Berkeley, I'm currently an
Einstein, visiting fellow at the Free University in Berlin.
So I spend a chunk of time running an
art and philosophy project there. Um And so I
can also be contacted through um through uh the
Free University. Um And for, for those of you
in Germany or in Europe.
Ok, great. So, Doctor Noe, thank you so much
again, for taking the time to come on the
show. I really love the book so I can't
recommend it enough to my audience. And I hope
that everyone out there that will eventually listen to
or watch this interview will buy the book. So
thank you so much for taking the time to
come on the show. And it's been a real
pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you Ricardo. It's been a pleasure for me
too and thank you to your audience.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitting B no Wolf, Tim Hall, Erica LJ Connors,
Philip Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken
Herz J and Lain Jung Y and the K
Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel Sran David Wilson,
the Yasa dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani,
Charlotte, Bli, Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo Stassi, Nale
Me, Gary G Alman Samo. Zal Ari and YPJ
Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry
Franka Gilon Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio, Theophano
Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams Di Costa
Anton Erickson, Charles Murray, Alex Chao, Marie Martinez, Coralie
Chevalier, Bangalore Fist, Larry Dey Junior, Old Einon Starry
Michael Bailey, then Spur by Robert Grassy, Zoren Jeff
mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dvor
Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica
a week in the brand and Nicholas Carlson Ismael
Bensley Man George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi
Perpendicular J Ner Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David
Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers is our web,
Jim Frank Lucani, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon, Benedikt Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carlman Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan
Knit and Rosie. Thank you for all